So welcome to Introduction to
Mac and iPhone Development,
and welcome to our sold-out event, WWDC.
So before I get started,
I'd kind of like to
get an idea for myself.
How many of you are here at
WWDC for the first time ever?
Oh, awesome.
It's fantastic to see so many
new developers at the conference.
So one hour really isn't much time
to go over all the concepts needed to
develop iPhone apps and Mac OS X apps.
So this is going to be a bit
of a whirlwind technology tour.
And hopefully as you see
things that you like,
you'll be able to remember them and
follow up on them later on in the week.
So I'm Deric Horn.
I'm the application
technologies evangelist.
And really what that means is I'm
responsible for the promotion and
adoption of our key technologies,
our key application
technologies by our developers.
And then I'm also a voice for
the developers back inside
of Apple Engineering so I can
help escalate issues and to
make sure that we're delivering
what you guys are dependent on.
So we released Mac OS X back in 2001,
and since then we've had
these steady updates.
And I think Leopard that we released last
October was an amazing release with huge
user features and developer features.
So everyone's been really busy, but,
you know, why stop there?
We released an entirely new
platform to develop for,
and that's the iPhone, of course.
So I just wanted to say thank you guys
for making the beta SDK such a success.
And I also wanted to thank those
hundreds of thousands of other people
that downloaded the SDK that couldn't
get their tickets for the conference.
So, I'm going to start off today by
talking a little bit about the
architecture of Mac OS X and iPhone,
a little bit about the development
frameworks to put things in perspective.
And then I think any time you
develop for a new platform,
and I know this when I was brought
into the iPhone development program,
there are really two fundamental
questions that you have.
One, I just really want to know
how do I get my code called?
You know,
how do I put a button on the screen
and have it call Hello World?
So, we're going to start off by
talking a little bit about
those development fundamentals,
the tools, the language,
and the frameworks that you're
going to use to write applications.
And then I think that the second
fundamental question you have is what
are those available technologies and how
do I integrate them into my application?
I mean, how hard is it to take something
like core location and integrate
that into my application?
So, along the way,
we'll have several demos.
We've got some sample code
associated with this session
on the attendees' website.
And hopefully, I'll be able to give you a
little bit of insight as to which
sessions you should follow up on.
So, I'm going to show you a little bit of
the standard architecture diagram you've
probably already seen a few times today,
but at the base we have
the Unix and kernel,
and this is at the bottom of
both the iPhone and Mac OS X,
and this really is Unix.
An engineer walked into my office,
I think, last week and he said, Deric,
when you say that Unix is on the iPhone,
what do you mean?
And it truly is.
So, for instance,
I wrote a little application about a
month ago to test the file system access,
you know, what files we have read-write
access to on the device itself.
That was all using straight POSIX, Fopen,
Fread, Fwrite type calls,
so that could run on a Solaris machine,
Mac OS X,
and runs perfectly on the iPhone.
And then above that we
have our core frameworks.
These are typically
our non-GUI frameworks,
like core foundation,
foundation type frameworks.
And above that we've got a
rich set of media frameworks.
And then finally,
you see where the architecture
begins to diverge,
and this is the application
development frameworks.
On Mac OS X you develop for Cocoa,
and on the iPhone for Cocoa Touch.
And then the glorious part,
where your applications get to
participate up at the native application
layer where you're going to see Safari,
mobile Safari, and hopefully your app
and your mobile app.
But really, I think what's more important
about this diagram is that
since the beginning of Mac OS X,
we've really tried to keep the operating
system very nimble and keep these
dependencies in a downward direction
so that we can now start to integrate
and adopt new technologies quickly
and integrate them into the system.
So on other platforms,
you may have to untangle a
bunch of spaghetti code in
order to take one technology
out and replace it with another.
But this type of architecture,
we take very seriously within
Apple so we can go ahead and move the
operating system and the development
frameworks forward very quickly.
Deric Horn, Larry Coopet
So I want to touch a little
bit about what the application
development frameworks are.
And basically,
if you've come to WWDC to learn about
how to do iPhone application development
or you've come to WWDC to learn
about how to do Mac OS X development,
you're going to leave knowing
how to develop on both platforms.
And that's because they really
share about 90% in common.
So for instance,
when you develop for Mac OS X,
you're going to develop
for the foundation,
non-GUI portion,
and you're going to use AppKit that's
going to provide all the user interface,
your event system,
and all that whole user experience level.
Well, on Cocoa Touch,
we have that exact same
foundation also available.
And then finally,
we're introducing UIKit,
and that's analogous to AppKit.
A lot of the same coding
concepts are based on AppKit.
It's very similar,
but it's designed specifically
with the iPhone in mind.
So what's the difference between the two?
So at this time,
I would like to welcome a
colleague of mine upstage,
and he is probably the person I know
that has had his fingers in more
code than anybody else I've ever met.
I'd like to welcome Larry Coope up here.
Thanks, Deric.
Thanks a lot.
So, as Deric mentioned,
I work in worldwide developer relations,
helping other developers bring
their applications to the Mac.
So,
I want to tell a story real quick.
Every year a friend of mine comes to
WWDC and he complains how Apple makes
him learn all these new things.
And I tease him every year.
I say, yes, if it wasn't for Apple,
you would never learn anything new.
So he sent me this email with this quote,
and I thought it was appropriate
as you guys are bombarded by the
amount of information this week,
which is, learning is not compulsory,
but neither is survival.
So keep that in mind this week when
you're going through all your content.
So as Deric said,
we're going to talk briefly about tools,
language,
and developing for Mac OS X and iPhone.
So tools.
As you heard this morning,
Xcode is our IDE.
And like Deric said,
how do I get started?
This is it.
This is where everything begins
and you're going to build all
your applications based on this.
The cool thing about Xcode
and our tools is they're built
on industry standard tools.
GCC, GDB, LD,
including Dtrace for optimization.
So these are tools you're
already familiar with.
You guys already know this stuff.
Next, about Xcode is,
Always start from a template.
As developers, people say, well,
I've got this complicated build system.
You really need to start
Xcode with a template.
I know it's obvious, but believe me,
a lot of people won't do it.
Drag your code in.
And what's interesting about the tools
that differ from other platforms,
it's tight integration
with Interface Builder.
Okay?
And why is that interesting?
Because Interface Builder
is not just a UI editor.
As you've seen all day today, right,
it's an integral part of
your development system.
And its tight integration with
Xcode lets it know about your code.
Why is that important?
You're going to let IB do the dirty
work and a lot of the heavy lifting.
Instantiation of UI objects
as well as your class objects,
which are tightly coupled.
Okay?
So,
The other thing I want to say about
Xcode is that it's very flexible.
If you do have a complex
enterprise-based build system,
and boy, I need to do this.
As Deric said,
we've got Unix under the hood, okay?
I can script this thing any way I want,
whether it's Python, Perl, Ruby,
calling Xcode externally.
We've got a command line tool,
Xcode build.
So as simple or as
complicated as you want,
you can build your build system.
But day-to-day,
you as developers will use
a really powerful integrated
development environment.
Next, Objective-C, okay?
I have a lot of developers say,
I can't throw my code away.
You do not do that, okay?
Objective-C is a superset of C.
And the cool thing about our tools is
GCC is a full Objective-C++ compiler.
And people say, what does that mean?
Mix and match, okay?
There is zero restrictions.
Whatever you've got, your C, C++,
can be tightly integrated
in the same file,
the same function, the same line,
which you'll see in the demo.
So definitely,
you're going to be reusing your
intellectual property code every day.
So, Objective-C.
Let's take a little look, real briefly.
I want to point out something here.
So what have we got?
I want to point out that the
semantic differences between
the two languages are not big.
The learning curve here is small.
In this case,
I've got some C++ code and the
equivalent line of an Objective-C call.
I've got an object that I'm talking to,
my WND, my window object,
and I'm calling a method on that.
Set frame.
Okay?
The first parameter is the frame
or my rectangle that I'm setting.
And here's where Objective-C starts
to get really interesting.
And as being an old C++ guy,
I resisted this.
But what's really great,
I really love Objective-C now.
Because what's that?
Heck if I know.
Go to your headers.
Talk to your other developers.
What's this Boolean I'm passing?
Well, in Objective-C,
the name parameters are named.
So, in this case,
this method is called set
frame colon display colon.
And that is the method's signature.
And it's hopefully, if you write your own
Objective-C functions well,
they are self-documenting.
In this case,
this is a true method on NSWindow.
And it tells me I need to
display this window now.
As you know,
Mac OS X is a buffered windowing system.
And it delays all updates.
But in this case, I need to tell it,
I need you to update right now.
So, this is really powerful.
And you'll see why later.
And again, to point out,
I really want to get this
through everyone's head.
It's truly mix and match.
In this case,
this is actually from a file of mine,
some sample code.
There's my C++ object.
I'm extracting a value from it.
And I'm passing it right
to an Objective-C method.
Zero limitations.
So, Objective-C being the language.
What are the real differences at runtime?
Well, Objective-C is loosely typed.
As you get into it, you'll see.
And it's dynamically name-bound.
So I said set frame colon display colon,
that's the name of the function.
That is found by name.
There's no virtual tables.
There's no pointers.
That is name-bound.
And what does that allow me to do?
That powerful, simple construct lets me
introspect classes and instance
of classes to see if that object
responds to that message by name.
And you'll see how powerful
this is as you get more and
more into Objective-C and Cocoa.
So we've talked about
Objective C a little bit.
What is Cocoa?
Well, it's clearly our
object-oriented environment.
It's a full-featured,
mature set of frameworks that
you're going to build your
interface and application on,
and if you're bringing
your other code across,
that you'll build on top of that.
It really allows you to
build really powerful,
really consistent applications.
So the important point I like to point
out here is one of the really fantastic
benefits of Cocoa is the ability
to remove that day-to-day tedium,
right, for you guys,
where you can really focus on your
applications and not worry about all
the details building your application.
One of the important things
about Cocoa as a framework,
and that, like Deric says,
Apple takes very seriously,
is there's very few design patterns
used throughout the system that you
will see repeated over and over again.
Things like the naming patterns.
When you see a certain
signature in a function,
you know that you own that object
that it's returning to you,
or the system does.
And that helps you with
your memory management.
How do I manage memory?
I can just look at the
function and I know.
And it's used everywhere.
Things like target action.
How do I get my code called?
How do I reuse off-the-shelf,
built-in components, but for my
application-specific behaviors?
And delegation,
which allows me to literally
delegate temporarily some
functionality to an object that
I know little or nothing about.
And then, model view controller.
This is really important
for you guys bringing your,
you know, multi-platform, multi-device.
device code to the Mac.
So the goal again, more functionality,
less code.
And the other thing I really
love about Cocoa now is,
you know, in the days when we used to
rapidly prototype things and
you'd have to go back and say,
okay, I've got a prototype and I have
to go back and do it for real.
Now my rapid prototype is my
production code and it's really,
really fantastic.
Again, keep focused on your application
and not on the details of,
you know, the system.
So I want to talk briefly about
the three important ones here,
target action, delegation,
and model view controller.
So target action, what is it?
It really,
a target is an instance of your
object and the action is the method
that's gonna be tied to that instance.
And again,
we'll see this later in the demo.
Delegation.
I love this slide because
it's way too complicated.
It makes it look a lot
harder than it really is.
What's important to take away from this
is that Cocoa uses this over and over.
When you come to a platform
and you want to take override
standard system behavior,
the first thing you
think of is subclassing.
How do I take that system object
and make it do what I need it to do?
Well, in delegation,
You don't have to, in Cocoa,
we think we have a better way,
which allows you to say, okay,
I'm gonna temporary turn over
functionality to you to a delegate object
[Transcript missing]
Model-view controller.
When I first started learning Cocoa,
and everyone talked about this,
I was like, what?
Model?
I'm not a 3D app.
What?
And so I like to think of it this way.
Engine, UI, glue.
The engine being your
intellectual property,
your code, the view, obviously the UI,
and the controller really is the
glue or the arbiter between the two.
And the important thing in this
slide to point out is the arrows.
When you have a system where
that model and the view start
to talk to each other directly,
you've got problems.
Because the view system
is changing so often.
Look at,
if you're familiar with Cocoa at all,
you know that UI kit is
slightly different than NS view.
And if you've followed this paradigm,
you can easily port
your code to the iPhone.
So what does this mean for
you guys as developers?
And this is the number one
thing I tell developers.
You must take ownership, right?
People say, well,
my view holds state information.
That's just a bad idea architecturally,
right?
Your model,
your engine should hold your state.
You know,
you really need to factor that code
so that it plays nicely everywhere.
And like I said,
removing view dependencies on state
and other information like that so that
the controller can be the go-between.
And then as you do that,
you automatically will be able to
take advantage of all these really,
really rich technologies that
Deric's going to show you later.
[Transcript missing]
Thank you.
So in my slide,
I was talking to you how NS Window can
delegate its resizing if you choose.
So I'm going to open Xcode here,
and I'm going to open a new project
and pick a Mac OS X application.
And one of the advantages of
starting from a template is I'm
going to run this application.
Build.
I know you guys have
seen this this morning.
So I've got an application
up and running.
So what I want to do is I'm going
to drag in my model code here.
Let me show you what this is going to do.
So this is a simple C++ object.
This is purposely trivial.
You'll notice it includes no Mac code.
It's a C++ object that's going
to help me constrain my window,
right?
Very artificial,
but it's... And I've got two
methods that are important.
It's set constraint and set ratio.
Okay?
Now I'm going to go right
to my controller class.
So I'm going to create a new file.
And I'm going to say I want
Cocoa and I want to Objective C class
and I'll call it MyController.
And here's a little trick.
If you're going to use C++,
there's many ways to tell GCC that
I want to integrate Objective-C and C++,
but just like a .c file that
tells the compiler what it is,
.m is a Cocoa file,
.mm is an Objective-C++ file.
So I'm going to rename that there.
Then I want to...
I'm going to open my little
helper script app here so you
guys don't have to see me type.
So I'm going to add my
little constrainor object.
Then I'm going to add my instance,
which is a straight C++ instance.
And then I'm going to add--
Two wrapper functions, right?
You notice the IB action on there.
That's so Interface
Builder recognizes that.
And so these are kind of
going to wrap my C++ object.
Let's go back to the, now here's my,
let me open that in a
bigger window for you.
So now here's the implementation of that.
And I need to do a little bit
more dirty work because I'm
instantiating a C++ object.
So my constructors and destructors.
Then, here's the important part.
Those action methods I declare,
I just want to point out that all
I'm doing is passing this message
down directly to my C++ object.
That's it.
And you're going to see a lot
of Cocoa code like that that
trivially wraps your C++.
And then...
I'm going to implement
my delegate methods.
Another interesting point, I,
you can search this project,
I never call this code.
The cool thing is, it's funny,
some people say sometimes with Cocoa,
I feel like I'm not always in control.
that's sometimes true.
So the window object's
going to be calling me,
not me.
So I build that.
So I've got my code, my engine code,
which is my model.
I've got my controller code.
I need a view.
So now I'm going to close that.
And again,
I've started from a nice template.
So I've got my interface
builder file here.
And I'm going to go and first
I'm going to grab an object,
put that in there,
which is my instance of
my controller object.
And what's cool about interface builder,
remember I said the tight
coupling between the two,
I go in here and I can
just start typing M.
It already knows about my controller.
And indeed, when I hit my tab,
it shows my methods there, right there.
So I can start hooking things up to that.
Okay?
And the last thing I need to do...
The second for the last thing is now
drag and tell that window that my object,
which is just a generic object,
is the delegate of the window and that
it should receive delegate messages.
Now I want to hook up my interface to...
Put in, for now,
I need to wait to set the ratio
for my width to height ratio,
and I want to tell it,
and I need a little checkbox.
Again, this is very trivial to say, hey,
start.
Start constraining the window.
And then let's hook those up too.
So I want to say when this guy changes,
I want to call set constraint ratio.
And when this guy changes,
I want to say toggle the constraint.
So hopefully,
if I haven't done anything wrong here,
I can go back to Xcode and build this.
It already knows,
because of the tight integration,
that the interface builder file is dirty.
So you save all.
[Transcript missing]
Run it.
And now I can type in 1.5.
Nothing should happen until
I click my Constrain button.
And now you can see I'm
constraining the window.
And if, real quick, if you want to see
something quick and dirty,
just so you know, I'm not calling that.
And we'll go down and set a
breakpoint on the toggle here.
And if I debug this...
[Transcript missing]
Clicker.
Back to slides, please.
Great.
So thank you, Larry.
That was a demonstration of some of the
common design patterns that you're going
to use over and over in all of the modern
frameworks that you're going to use,
whether it's iPhone or Mac Development.
And also, hopefully you realized how
trivial it is to integrate C++
and Objective-C code together.
So when I think of Cocoa,
I think of it as being both
modern and mature in that it's
been developed for 20 years now,
but it's also been extended
over those 20 years.
So it has this great design
pattern that really allows us
to integrate new technologies.
So some of the newest technologies
that we integrated in the last
release of Mac OS 10.5 Leopard
include things like 64-bit.
So this is a core infrastructure change.
So now your applications can be
built 64-bit from the ground up.
We added a technology called
NSOperation that in a way allows you
to incrementally add threading support.
And multi-core support
into your application.
It's resolution independent.
So all the views and controls
can be scaled to any size.
And your views can
participate in that as well.
But I'd kind of like to take a
look at just a little bit deeper
at one really killer technology.
Just so you can see a little bit how
it fits into the operating system
and in the development frameworks.
And that's core animation.
So if you've ever written
animation code before,
typically you do it through timers.
You're going to set a timer, keep state,
and move that thing along.
And it's a pretty expensive way
to do it because you have to keep
on re-rendering that content.
Well, when we architected core animation,
we did it based on the concept of layers.
So that once you render your contact,
that expensive operation of
rendering that content onto a layer,
we can now perform these
operations on it without having
you re-render that content.
Fade it in, fade it out, move it around.
Or you can even apply like 3D
matrix transformations to it
to have it fly through space.
And all without having you
re-render that content.
Well,
we further improved on that performance
by letting the core animation
engine sit on top of the OpenGL,
hardware accelerated pipeline.
And then furthermore,
we improved the performance by having
core animation run in its own thread
so that your user interface can
stay responsive while you're having
animations go on in the background.
We also made this great graphics
kind of unification layer in that
because it's based on layers,
you can render different types of
content in these core animation layers
and then compose scenes by coalescing
these layers together and then change
the attributes of each of these layers.
So now where this gets interesting
is we take all of this functionality
and performance and bring it up into
the Cocoa layer to make it very easy
to add core animation or animation
effects into your application.
So let's see a little bit how to do that.
So typically,
you can probably understand right now,
if we're going to call
set frame on a view,
it's just going to change
its origin and its bounds.
So we'll just flip it
to another location.
So how does Cocoa integrate
with core animation?
How do we make this animate?
Well, it's really as simple as adding
about half of a line of code.
Instead of calling set
frame on the view itself,
we call set frame on the view's
animator and then we automatically
get that smooth animation.
Okay, so we've talked a little bit about
Cocoa and Mac OS X development.
Now I'd kind of like to switch
gears and talk about the iPhone.
So when we took a look at the iPhone,
we had to take a look at this futuristic
device and really design something that
can be based on almost on the future.
Design an entirely new operating system,
entirely new development frameworks.
So where we started was with the
latest version of Mac OS X 10.5 Leopard
and bring all those technologies
down onto this little device,
the iPhone.
At the heart of your iPhone development
is going to be the UIKit framework.
Any application you write is
going to have to use UIKit.
It's responsible for that user interface,
all of those controls, views, widgets,
table views are a big part of it.
We also introduce a number
of controller classes.
A fundamental one is the view
controllers to help you manage
all of your user interface items,
as well as an event system.
So the way we worked out the UI kit
sessions through WWDC is really
we go from the fundamental session
and then we get into more detailed
sessions throughout the week.
So I recommend that you go to the iPhone
Application Development Fundamental
Session at tomorrow morning at 9 o'clock.
And then throughout the week,
you'll see more advanced and more
kind of detailed topics where
you can learn more information.
So let's start off with
the user interface.
Right out of the box,
we provide some standard,
very good-looking controls that
I think your users are used to,
understand how they work,
and make for an intuitive application.
And those include all
those standard things,
buttons, sliders, text fields, switches,
and so forth.
Now, you can create your user interface
either directly in Interface
Builder or if you want to,
all of the same functionality is
available to create through code.
But I really encourage you to take
your user interface to the next level,
to really make something that's
intuitive and easy to use and
that your users can be proud of.
And there are some very
easy ways to do this.
You can, for instance,
start to integrate your own custom
images into the background of your
application or integrate your own custom
images for buttons and your own views.
You can just take it one little step
further and start to add animation
into your iPhone applications for,
for instance, transitions to convey state
changes or context changes.
And I think that adds a sense of reality
to your application that users can
understand and intuitively move around.
So we have an iPhone application
user interface design session in
Presidio on Wednesday morning at 9.
So,
when you develop an iPhone application,
there are really two fundamental
concepts that you need to learn.
And I really encourage you to really
learn these and not just copy and
paste the code from sample code and
try and use it in your application.
These are fundamental concepts that
every application is going to use.
And one of them is the
concept of view controllers.
On any iPhone application
that you look at,
it's going to be made of
several screenfuls of data.
And automatically when
I look at that application,
I know that every screen that I see is
going to be managed by a view controller.
So going back to that MVC diagram,
that view controller is going
to manage all the user interface
elements on that screen.
When a user clicks a button,
it's going to call some
method in my view controller,
and then my view controller can
go ahead and get that image,
do some processing,
and then do something else with it.
So to take a quick look at what the base
UI view controller class looks like,
it's got an instance
variable called view.
Okay, simple enough.
And that points to your view container.
Within that view container,
you can now embed other views
and controls and buttons and your
own custom views inside of there.
It also has a couple of convenient
methods associated with it.
Things like viewDidLoad,
so that once your user interface
loads from Interface Builder,
that gives you the opportunity
to populate your user
interface with your own data.
and a number of other ones too.
So because view controllers
are such a fundamental
concept in iPhone development,
we have two sessions
covering view controllers.
The first one is understanding
iPhone view controllers on Tuesday at
two o'clock in the morning.
And we also have a mastering iPhone
view controller session as well.
So the next fundamental concept of
iPhone development is table views.
I don't think that I've seen
an iPhone application yet
that does not use table views.
I mean, some people point to games,
but sooner or later they have
to represent their high scores,
and they're going to do
that through a table view.
And one of the things I really
like about the table views is
that you can get them up on screen
with really very little code,
and then yet at the same time,
they're very extensible,
so you can get them to portray
really unique data with
just a little extra effort.
So our table views by
default come in two styles,
a plain style which
stretches edge to edge,
and a group style which has those
kind of rounded corners that you
see in the settings application.
By default, the table views contain
sections and section headers.
If you look in the address book,
the letter H would be a section header
and all the names underneath that are
going to be included in that section.
Or if you go back to that settings
application and look at that,
the sections are divided
by logical sections.
You'll have a section header called
security and all the security-related
sessions underneath that.
But my favorite feature of the
iPhone table views is the fact that
it can support these complex views.
So if you look at any one
of these table view rows,
it's called table view cell.
But a table view cell is
actually just a UI view.
That means it's a UI view container.
At this point, you can put arbitrary
views inside of there.
Images, buttons, text, your own views.
You can make your table row
doesn't have to be 44 pixels high.
You can make it any height you want.
And all of your rows can have
different heights if you want to.
The iPhone Table View also
has support for editing,
so when the user clicks
on the edit button,
it will automatically slide your
views over and put that little add
or delete button right next to them.
And it supports a lot more.
So along those same lines,
we have two sessions
covering iPhone Table Views.
The first one is tomorrow at 3.30,
Understanding iPhone Table Views,
and later on in the week we
also have a Mastering iPhone
Table Views session as well.
So those pinch, rotation,
and swipe gestures can really
make interacting with your
application more intuitive.
Now,
you can get access to all the touches
at any time and interrogate them,
but UIKit offers a couple of
convenience methods to you.
So let's go ahead and step through
the process of what happens when
the user swipes against your iPhone.
When the user puts his
finger down on the screen,
your ViewsTouchesBegin
method will get called.
And that gives you a chance
to go ahead and store away the
location of that first touch.
Then as the user swipes his
finger across the screen,
your TouchesMove method
is repeatedly called.
So this provides a chance for
you to give user feedback.
And then finally, as the user lifts his
finger from the screen,
your TouchesEnded method is called,
and now you can go ahead and determine
what type of a gesture this was.
But multi-touch is really only one of
the input devices or one of the ways
to input information into the iPhone.
Another very interesting way
is to use the accelerometer.
So the accelerometer gives
you very fine detail as to the
gravitational pull along the X,
Y, and Z axis.
And it will call back into your
application up to 100 times a second.
So it can detect little changes
in the orientation you make.
Or I've often seen applications
where if you shake them,
it will go ahead and erase
whatever you have on screen,
as an example.
And then view controllers also implement
some higher level delegate routines to,
for instance,
detect the rotation of your iPhone.
So as you move it from
portrait to landscape mode,
it will automatically call you
back and give you a chance to relay
out your user interface to take
advantage of that wider display.
So we have a great session
called the iPhone Multi-Touch
Events and Gestures Session.
The session has some terrific
sample code associated with it that
really gives you a good head start
on supporting things like rotation
and those zooming pinch gestures.
So if you're interested
at all in multi-touch,
I highly suggest you go to this session.
So we've talked about kind of the basics
of developing Mac software and the basics
of developing an iPhone application.
But when you think about
integrating a new technology,
sometimes you think, oh my gosh,
that sounds like a lot of work.
I'm going to have to roll up my screens.
I mean,
wouldn't it be nice if integrating a
new technology were as easy as one,
two, three?
So let's take a look at that.
Core location.
So when I think of my iPhone,
I think of it as a personal computer.
I mean,
it's a computer and it's on my person.
So why not take advantage of
the functionality it has and use
technologies like core location?
You simply supply a delegate and it
will call you back with changes in
your latitude and longitude changes.
What's nice about the API is
it's designed to work regardless
of the hardware installed.
So it'll work the same API across
triangulation through the edge network,
Wi-Fi hotspots, or even GPS locations.
So let's go ahead and see what it takes
to integrate a technology like that,
core location, into our application.
Well, it's just three lines of code.
The first line,
we're going to go ahead and allocate
memory for our core location object
and tell it to initialize itself.
Then we're going to go
ahead and set the delegate.
99 out of 100 times,
you're going to set the delegate to self.
It's typically a controller class that's
going to initialize the object and wants
to get notified of changes that are made.
And finally,
we tell core location to start updated.
It's that simple.
So we've got a session on core location,
the accelerometer,
and using the camera on Presidio
on Thursday evening at 5.
So how else can you personalize
the experience on your iPhone?
Well, you can add address book
information in there.
So using the address book APIs,
you can query contacts, add contacts,
delete contacts,
and then when you plug your iPhone in,
it will automatically sync with your
address book on your desktop machine.
So what does it take to
display the address book like
this in your own application?
Seems like a lot of work.
Well, again,
it's just three lines of code.
We're going to go ahead and allocate
in it the address book controller,
set its delegate to self,
and then tell it to display itself,
and it'll come animating in.
And then as the user
selects one of these names,
it'll call your delegate method back with
the information about what was selected.
So Alex Abas,
the engineer that wrote the address
book for Mac OS X and iPhone,
is giving a session on
Thursday morning at 9.
So what else is available on the phone?
Well, there's a camera.
So using the UI image picker class,
you can have access to all
the albums on your iPhone.
You can tell it to take a picture.
And when you tell it to take a picture,
it'll go ahead and create that
user experience for you so that
when the user clicks the button,
it'll snap the picture.
You can resize it, crop it, and so forth.
And you can also save arbitrary
images back into the photo album.
And then the next time you sync that
phone with your desktop computer,
those pictures will be uploaded.
It will be synced to your iPhone.
your computer.
So again, how do we integrate all this
technology into your application?
Are you guys seeing a pattern here?
Allocate an init,
set the delegate to self,
and then ask it to present itself.
And it's just that easy.
Then as the user selects
one of these pictures,
it will call your delegate method for you
to interpret it and pull the image out.
But the image picker is just one of
the kind of the media technologies
that we have on the phone.
I think the Mac has had a long
history of really forging ahead
on the media technologies.
And what we've done is taken what
was in Mac OS 10.5 Leopard and
integrated that onto the phone.
So technologies like OpenGL for
embedded systems are available
for your 3D graphics.
Core animation has been on
the phone since day one.
You can use Quartz for your
2D vector-based drawing and
to go ahead and render PDF.
Core audio for high-fidelity
audio input and output.
We've got OpenAL to implement
surround sound within the iPhone.
The media player, which is capable of
playing MPEG-4 movies.
And UIKit provides a number of
other classes to manipulate images.
And one of my favorites
is the UI image view.
It's just the simple way of adding
an image to your application.
So for instance,
if you wanted to change the
background of your application,
just replace that base container
view with the UI image view.
And now you can give it a nice like
leather or wood grain appearance,
for instance.
So we've talked a little bit
about iPhone development,
Mac development, but there's really a
third platform out there,
and I think a lot of you
are probably web developers.
So again, to add, well,
so typically in an application,
you may have already
written a web application.
And now you're going to go ahead
and write a native application.
And when the user clicks
on one of these links,
the default behavior is to go
ahead and launch Safari and maybe
launch your web app in Safari.
And that's going to cause
your application to quit.
But that's not a great user experience.
You want to keep the user in
the context of your application.
So the best way to do that is to embed a
web view directly into your application.
So now, again,
this is three lines of code to embed a
web view directly in your application
or actually zero lines of code if
you do it from Interface Builder.
So here we have an embedded web view.
But where this really gets interesting
now is that your native application
can interact with this web view.
You can actually call
JavaScript functions within
the context of this web page,
or you can load your own JavaScripts or
create your JavaScripts on the fly and
kind of inject them into this web page,
and they will have full access
to the complete DOM over here.
So, for instance,
I want to go ahead and change the style
sheet from underneath this web page.
Well, it's just two more lines of code.
I go ahead and I load my JavaScript,
and I call one API to have it evaluate
within the context of that page,
and it will switch the CSS style sheet.
So we've got a great sample associated
with this session as kind of giving
you a good head start on integrating
your web applications with your native
applications called Style Switcher.
And I also wanted to mention that
it is possible to place things
like buttons within your web page,
and then when you click on that button,
it can actually affect how your
native application behaves.
So if I placed a take picture
button in my web page,
I can click on that,
my native application can detect that,
and then take a picture
using the UI image picker,
for instance.
So all that information is
available with the sample code.
Okay, so now we've covered
all these technologies.
It's been kind of a
whirlwind technology tour.
And now the question is,
how do you write an iPhone
application from scratch?
Well,
I think maybe you've heard about that
$100 million iFund and you're thinking,
I'm going to come to this session,
I'm going to learn how I can grab
a piece of that $100 million iFund.
And actually, we do have a session on the
iFund later on this week.
I believe it's on Thursday.
So I think it all
starts out with an idea.
You have a great idea.
You want to do a little bit of research,
see if it's feasible,
see if there's any sample
code you can leverage,
see the reference material,
the documentation.
And I actually have a really good idea,
and it's going to make me rich.
So let's go ahead and
see what that idea is.
I have this idea that I'm going
to go ahead and make tutorials.
This is going to be a
little native application,
and I'm going to teach different things
like foreign languages or teach people
how to write iPhone applications.
And I'm going to put them for sale.
On the iTunes Music Store.
And the way writing any iPhone
application starts is by
storyboarding the application.
They're always going to take
multiple screenfuls of data.
So if you were to look
in my office right now,
you'd see tons of these little printouts
of iPhones lying around my desk,
and you'd see these little stick
figures drawn all over them.
And the idea is, on my main screen,
I'm going to want some sort of a title,
tutor player,
and I'm going to put a play button there.
And when the user clicks the play button,
I want to go ahead and
launch another screen,
and that's going to show my tutorial.
And I'm going to provide all
these controls on it so that
the user can rewind a little bit
in case they missed something.
So just by looking at this,
I can think like, OK, two screens,
two controllers.
That's what I'm going to need to do.
So let's go ahead and walk through
the steps of what actually it
takes to write this application.
Excellent.
So we're going to go
ahead and launch Xcode.
First thing we're going to want
to do is create a new project.
In this case, we're going to create
an iPhone application.
You can see right off the bat,
we've got six different default
templates to choose from.
If you're going to write an OpenGL game,
this template will provide a
GL surface for you to render on.
We have some common navigation paradigms,
like a tab bar that appears at
the bottom or a navigation bar
where you're going to drill down
and get more detailed information.
But in this case,
we're just going to create
a simple iPhone application,
and I'm going to call it Tutor Player.
Save it on my desktop.
Great.
And what we can see straight off the bat,
is that we have a view controller file.
So great,
it's going to create one for me.
And we've got our main file
and the app delegate where
everything gets kicked off.
So let's go ahead and
run the application.
says it's running.
Oh, no, device.
Okay, can we switch over to device?
Marianne, do I click this button?
I can build it for the simulator.
Oh, I'm sorry.
Oh, great.
Thank you.
Okay.
So now we see our actual
application running on my device,
on my own iPhone.
Now, it looks pretty simple right now.
All I see is a white screen,
so it doesn't look too fancy yet.
If I quit the application,
my application is right
here called Tutor Player,
and you can see that it just has
a plain white square for an icon.
Not too fancy yet,
but it's a good starting point.
place.
So let's go ahead and pop
open our view controller.
So since we did see
that one white screen,
I have a good idea that my
view controller is going to
manage that white screen.
Sorry.
Can you guys see now?
That was a trick,
a little bit magic behind the scenes.
Actually, I just have my tutor player
view controller.h file open.
As you can see,
it's derived from the UI view controller.
And there's a couple
things we want to do.
First,
we want to add in support to Play Movies.
Now, that's not directly in UIKit.
That's in a separate framework.
So let me--
So we're going to go ahead and include
a separate header file that has a
definition for our media player.
Now within our view controller,
we're going to store an
instance to that movie player.
And we'll just call it movie player here.
And when the user
presses that play button,
we want it to call one of
our action methods to have it
actually start playing that movie.
We want it to load that movie
and start playing that movie.
So as you can see here,
this IB action keyword again will
be parsed from interface builder
so it understands that this is
a method that can be called.
So now that we've added
this header file here,
we also have to add the library.
So let me open up my frameworks.
I'm just going to go ahead
and find the UI kit framework,
and right above it is our
media player framework.
We'll go ahead and drag that in.
Okay, so now we've added the path
into our Xcode build settings.
And while we're adding
things into our project file,
let's go ahead and add our movie and a
special icon that an artist made for us.
And we'll go ahead and drag
that into the resources folder.
and we'll make sure that they're
copied into the application itself.
Okay, so now we've copied the
application icon in there,
but we still have to kind of say
that this is the picture we want
to use for our application icon.
And you do that by specifying
it in your property list.
You can see that there's a
key there called icon file.
We'll go ahead and
tell it the name of it.
Appicon.png.
Looks like I spelled it correctly.
Let's save that.
And you'll also notice that
we have two interface builder
files associated in our project.
We've got the main window,
which is going to create the main window,
and our two-player view controller nib.
So this is the one that's
going to be responsible for
that white screen that we saw.
So let's go ahead and open this one up.
And we see,
we just see this white screen here.
Great.
So far things are as we expected.
So in my design, I had a label up on top.
Go ahead and parse that.
Drag our label in there.
One of the nice things
about Interface Builder,
as you can see,
as I drag it from side to side,
it'll present these blue guides for me.
And these guides are created according
to the user interface guidelines.
So it knows which controls
are next to which controls and
how far they should be apart.
So we'll go ahead and
label this Tutor Player.
Great, but I want to make it kind of
center justified so we can do
all this from Interface Builder.
The font's a little small,
so let's go ahead and bump
it up to about 46 points.
That looks better.
And the other thing we had down
on our storyboard was a button.
So let me go ahead and find a button.
We'll just go ahead and drag a standard
round button into our application.
I'm going to make it nice and
big so the user can't miss it.
And we'll call it Play.
And again, as we drag this around,
you'll see a blue guide
appear when it's centered.
Perfect.
But myself, my phone is black,
at least this phone,
until maybe my boss buys me
one of those new white ones.
But the phone is black,
so I kind of like my applications to
blend in with the rest of the phone.
So we'll go ahead and change
the color of our background,
of our main screen,
and make it black here.
But now all of a sudden
we can't see our text,
so let's change the color of our text,
and we'll make it kind of a gray color.
But now the button stands out,
so we'll set the button color
a different way in this case.
Just for fun, we're going to go ahead and
set the alpha of the button,
so it's going to blend in with
whatever background we have.
Okay,
so the user interface looks pretty good,
but there's still one
more thing we have to do.
When the user clicks the play button,
we want it to call that start
action method that we defined in
our view controller's header file.
So in order to do that,
we can drag a connection from the
play button to our controller.
So by holding down the control key,
we'll drag the connection to the file's
owner and click on the start action.
Now file's owner really just
represents the object that
loaded this interface file,
and in this case,
it's our view controller.
So let's go ahead and save this.
Go back to Xcode,
and let's find our files.
Okay, so we have already updated our
header file to contain the correct
instance variables and methods here.
Now let's go ahead and write
the methods that we need to
go ahead and find this movie,
load it into memory,
maybe we want to play the
movie in landscape mode,
and add all those controls.
So let's see what's involved with adding
a new technology to our application.
Deric Horn, Larry Coopet
Well, again,
it's just one short little method here.
All we're going to do in the first
line is get the path to our movie file.
It's an MPEG-4 file.
Convert that file path into a URL.
And because movie player
is an instance variable,
the first time we run through
this start action method,
we have to initialize it.
So we'll go ahead and ask it to
allocate itself and initialize itself.
And then once we've done that,
all we do is ask the
movie player to play.
It's that easy.
So now let's go ahead and build and go.
The build happened pretty quick.
It takes just a minute to
copy all those resources,
and it's a pretty big movie.
So it takes a little bit of time to
copy it over the tether onto the iPhone,
but let's go ahead and look
at the iPhone at this point.
Okay.
It's launching our application.
And there we go.
A little bit out of focus,
but there you go.
We see the user interface
that we designed here,
the title along with the play button,
and when we go ahead and
touch on the play button,
We can now see the movie that's playing.
If we tap again,
all those standard controls
come up that we'd expect.
We'll hit the pause button to pause it.
When we're done,
we click the done button and it
goes back to our main screen.
Thank you.
And finally,
when we quit the application,
you can see we now have a nice
little icon over there for
the Tutor Player application.
So again,
the sample code for this application,
it was pretty simple,
but it is available for you and
associated with this session.
So as you saw,
adding new technologies to your
applications is really pretty easy,
but you are inevitably
going to run into problems.
And when you do,
here's some good advice for you.
One of them is when you run into
something in source code that
you don't completely understand,
you can always option double-click on it,
and that will bring up
the reference library.
So that will tell you detailed
information about that method call,
as well as kind of the broader
picture of the technology.
If you're feeling a
little bit more confident,
you can command double-click on it,
and it will bring up the header
file with that exact definition.
So I always learn through
looking at sample code,
and we have some sample code
associated with this session and
also associated with a number
of other sessions here at WWDC,
but there's really a wealth of sample
code available at developer.apple.com.
So like I said,
whether you're doing iPhone
Development or Mac OS X Development,
about 90% of those concepts
are exactly the same.
And the book that has really become
almost the textbook and set the
standard for Mac OS X Development is
Cocoa Programming for
Mac OS X by Aaron Hillegas.
The third edition just
came out a few weeks ago,
and it also includes the
latest Leopard technologies
and tools involved with that.
So I highly encourage
you to buy this book,
read it, and go through the examples.
And lastly, WWDC.
We've got a number of
great technical sessions,
but what you may not have heard so much
about are the labs on the first floor.
The labs are really valuable
to help you get up and started.
And a lot of the time,
you're going to be working
one-on-one with an engineer,
and that could be the engineer
that wrote this technology.
and I also encourage you to take
advantage of the social aspects of WWDC.
It's a great place to
match names with faces,
do some networking.
We have a few events planned.
I know in a few minutes we've got an
event upstairs for the WWDC reception.
We've got the WWDC bash on Thursday,
which is a lot of fun.
We always get a good band out there.
So for those of you that
are new to the platform,
I encourage you to go
to a couple sessions.
Again, the iPhone
Application Development Fundamentals
session is
tomorrow at 9:00 in the morning.
Getting Started with Objective C:
Migrating from Other Languages
is tomorrow at 2:00.
And Cocoa Fundamentals
is tomorrow at 5:00.
And we also have a couple labs associated
with this session that we gave today,
and those are Tuesday at
2:00 and Thursday at 2:00.
So in summary, I just have a few
takeaway points for you.
One, view controllers are a fundamental
concept in your iPhone development.
Integrating new technologies into your
application really is as easy as one,
two, three.
And finally, this stuff is fun.
I mean, I want you guys to go back
to your hotel rooms and write
a little iPhone application,
and I challenge you that
when your own user interface
comes up on your own iPhone,
I challenge you not to
crack a smile at that point.
It really is fun.
So thank you very much.
If you guys have any questions,
thank you.